CHAPTER III
When I had attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that I should become a
student at the University of Ingolstadt.
I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the
completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those
of my native country.
My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could
arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever, her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest
danger. During her illness, many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain
from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to her entreaties, but when she heard
that the life of her favorites was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety.
She attended her sickbed, her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the
temper. Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her
preserver. On the third day, my mother sickened. Her fever was accompanied by the most alarming
symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her
deathbed, the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined
the hands of Elizabeth and myself.
My children, she said, my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed in the prospect
of your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father. Elizabeth,
my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas, I regret that I am taken from
you. And, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these
are not thoughts befitting me. I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death, and
will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world. She died calmly, and her countenance
expressed affection even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest
ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul
and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind can persuade
itself that she whom we saw every day, and whose very existence appeared part of our own,
can have departed forever, that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished,
and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard.
These are the reflections of the first days. But when the lapse of time proves the reality
of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not the
rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe a sorrow which all have
felt and must feel? The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a
necessity, and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege,
is not banished. My mother was dead, but we had still duties we ought to perform. We must
continue our course with the rest, and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains
whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these
events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It
appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose akin to death of the house of mourning
and to rush into the thick of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all I desired to see my
sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief, and strove to act the
comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life, and assumed its duties with courage and zeal.
She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins.
Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles
and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived. Clairvaux spent the last evening with us.
He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my
fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader, and saw idleness and ruin
in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being
from a liberal education. He said little, but when he spoke, I read in his kindling eye and in his
animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each other, nor persuade ourselves to say
the word farewell. It was said, and we retired under the pretense of seeking repose, each fancying
the other was deceived. But when, at morning's dawn, I descended to the carriage which was to
convey me away, they were all there. My father, again to bless me, Clairvaux, to press my hand
once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last
feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey
me away and indulge in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had ever been surrounded
by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure.
I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, I must form my own friends and be my own
protector. My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me
invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth and Clairvaux.
These were old familiar faces, but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of
strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey. But as I proceeded,
my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth, cooped up in one place,
and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires
were complied with, and it would indeed have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these
and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing.
At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my
solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased. The next morning I delivered my
introduction, and paid a visit to some of the principal professors. Chant, or rather the evil
influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the
moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father's door, led me first to Monsieur Cramp,
professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets
of his science. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt,
mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied.
The professor stared.
Have you, he said, really spent your time in studying such nonsense?
I replied in the affirmative.
Every minute, continued Monsieur Cramp with warmth, every instance that you have wasted
on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded
systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived where no one was
kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand
years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected, in this enlightened and
scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must
begin your studies entirely anew. So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of
several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed
me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence
a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that Monsieur
Voltmann, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days he omitted.
I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors
useless whom the professor reprobated, but I returned not at all the more inclined to
recur to these studies in any shape. Monsieur Cramp was a little squat man with a gruff
voice and a repulsive countenance. The teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of
his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected strain, perhaps, I have given
an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child,
I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science.
With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide
on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged
the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides,
I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters
of the science sought immortality and power. Such views, although futile, were grand. But now the
scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of
those visions on which my interest in the science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange
shimmers of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth. Such were my reflections during
the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities and the principal residence in my new abode. But as the ensuing
week commenced, I thought of the information which Mr. Cramp had given me concerning the lectures.
And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences
out of the pulpit, I recollected what he had said of Mr. Waldman, whom I had never seen,
as he had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness,
I went into the lecturing room which Mr. Waldman entered shortly after.
This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age,
but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence. A few grey hairs covered his temples,
but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect,
and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the
history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the
present state of the science, and explained many of its elementary terms. After having made a few
preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of
which I shall never forget.
The ancient teachers of this science, he said, promised impossibilities and performed nothing.
The modern masters promise very little. They know that metals cannot be transmuted,
and that the excelsior of life is a shimmerer. But these philosophers, whose hands seem only
made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pour over the microscope or crucible,
have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature,
and show how she walks in our hiding places. They ascend into the heavens. They have discovered how
the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost
unlimited powers. They can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock
the invisible world with its own shadows.
Such were the professor's words. Rather let me say, such the words of the fate announced to
destroy me. As he went on, I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy.
One by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being.
Chord after chord were sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought,
one conception, one purpose.
So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein. More, far more will I achieve.
Treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way,
explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
I closed my eyes that night. My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil.
I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it.
By degrees, after the morning's dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts
were as a dream. There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies,
and to devote myself to a science for which I believe myself to possess a natural talent.
On the same day I paid Monsieur Waldemann a visit. His manners in private were even more
mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mane during his lectures,
which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.
I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given his fellow
professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies, and smiled at
the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that Monsieur Cramp had
exhibited. He said that these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were
indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They had left to us, as an easier task,
to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they, in a
great degree, had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius,
however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of
I listened to a statement which was delivered without any presumption or affectation,
and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudice against modern chemists.
I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference
due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape. An experience in life would
have made me ashamed. Any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours.
I requested his advice concerning books I ought to procure.
I am happy, said Monsieur Voltman, to have gained a disciple, and if your application
equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural
philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made. It is on that account
that I have made it my peculiar study. But at the same time I have not neglected the other branches
of science. A man would make a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department
of human knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man of science, and not merely
a petty experimentalist, I would advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy,
including mathematics. He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses
of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure, and promising me
use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange the mechanism.
He also gave me a list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me. It decided my future destiny.
CHAPTER IV
From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the
term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works so full of genius and
discrimination which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the University, and found even
in Mr. Cramp a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined as is true with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not, on that account, the less valuable. In Mr. Waltman I found a true
friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were given
an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he
smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my
apprehension. My application was at first fluctuating and uncertain. It gained strength
as I proceeded, and soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared
in the light of morning, whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely,
may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment
of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Cramp often asked me,
with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst Monsieur Waltman expressed the most
heartfelt exaltation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no
visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which I hoped
to make. None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science.
In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know,
but in scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder. A mind of moderate
capacity which closely pursues one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that
I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in
this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement
of some chemical instrument which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university.
When I had arrived at this point and had become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of
natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence
there being no longer conducive to my improvement, I thought of returning to my friends and my native
town when an incident happened that protracted my stay. One of the phenomena which had peculiarly
attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and indeed any animal endued with life.
Whence, I often ask myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a bold question and one which
has ever been considered as a mystery. Yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
acquainted if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries? I resolved these
circumstances in my mind and determined henceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches
of natural philosophy which related to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural
enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable.
To examine the causes of life we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the
science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient. I must also observe the natural decay and corruption
of the human body. In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should
be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not even remember to have trembled at a tale of
The darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies
deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm.
Now I was led to examine the cause and the progress of this decay and forced to spend
days and nights in vaults and charnel houses. My attention was fixed upon every object the
most insupportable to the delicacy of human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man was
degraded and wasted. I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life.
I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and the brain. I paused, examining and analyzing
all the minutiae of causation as exemplified in the change from life to death and death to life,
until, from the midst of this darkness, a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant
and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it
illuminated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries
towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.
Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not more certainly
shine in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it,
yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and probable. After days and nights of incredible
labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life. Nay, more,
I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.
The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight in
rapture. After so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my
desires was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great
and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been progressively led to it were obliterated,
and I beheld only the result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since
creation of the world was now within my grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon
me at once. The information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as
I should point them towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead and found a passage to life
aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness
and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the
secret with which I am acquainted. That cannot be. Listen patiently until the end of my story,
and you will easily perceive why I am so reserved on that subject. I will not lead you on,
unguarded and ardent, as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. Learn from
me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and
how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world than he who aspires
to become greater than his nature will allow. When I found so astonishing a power placed within my
hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it.
Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing life, yet to prepare a frame for the reception
of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles and veins, still remained a work of
inconceivable difficulty and labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation
of a being like myself, or one of simpler organisation, but my imagination was too much
exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal
as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared
adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed.
I prepared myself for a multitude of reverses. My operations might be incessantly baffled,
and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered the improvement which every day
takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would
at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity
of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the
creation of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed,
I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make a being of gigantic stature, that is to say,
about eight feet in height and proportionally large. After having formed this determination
and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials,
I began. No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards,
like a hurricane in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal
bounds which I should break through and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new
species would bless me as its creator and source. Many happy and excellent natures would owe their
being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve
pursuing these reflections. I thought that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter,
I might in process of time, although I now found it impossible, to renew life where death had
apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits while I pursued my
undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study and my person had become
emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, I failed. Yet still I
clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I alone
possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated myself, and the moon gazed on my midnight labours
while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding places.
Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the
grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble and my
eyes swim with the remembrance, but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged
me forward. I seem to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit.
It was indeed but a passing trance that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as
the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate. I had returned to my old habits.
I collected bones from the charnel houses and disturbed with profane fingers the tremendous
secrets of the human frame, in a solitary chamber or other cell at the top of the house,
and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase,
I kept my workshop of filthy creation. My eyeballs were starting from their sockets
and attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the slaughterhouse
furnished many of my materials, and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation.
While still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near
to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, half and soul,
in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season, never did the fields bestow a more plentiful
harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage. I brought my work near to a conclusion.
The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, half and soul, in one pursuit. It
was a most beautiful season, never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest nor
the vines yield a luxurious vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature.
And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget
those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not seen for so long a time.
I knew my silence disquieted them, and I well remembered the words of my father.
I know that while you are pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we
shall hear regularly from you.
You must pardon me if I regard any interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your
other duties are equally neglected.
I knew well, therefore, what would be my father's feelings, but I could not tear my thoughts
from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my
imagination.
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until
the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.
I then thought my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness
on my part, but I am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I should
not be altogether free from blame.
A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind, and never
allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to
destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that
study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind.
If this rule were always observed, if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere
with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Caesar would
have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires
of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.
But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale, and your looks
remind me to proceed.
My father made no reproach in his letters, and only took notice of my silence by inquiring
into my occupations more particularly than before.
Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours, but I did not watch the blossom
on the expanding leaves, sights which before always yielded me supreme delight, so deeply
was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near a close, and now every day
showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded.
But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by
slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade, than an artist occupied
by his favourite employment.
Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree.
The fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow creatures as if I had been guilty
of a crime.
Sometimes I grew alarmed at the wreck I perceived that I had become, and the energy of my purpose
alone sustained me.
My labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and amusement would then drive
away incipient disease, and I promised myself both of these when my creation should be complete.